	
	
	 Another white rectangle, it was on the fifth step from the bottom, where I couldn't miss it. Through the glass in the door it cast a foolscap rectangle of paleness onto the wet pavement, and it was while I was standing in that rectangle, about to turn my key in the door, that I first saw the letter. Father had finished for the day, switched off the shop lights and closed the shutters; but so I would not come home to darkness he had left on the light over the stairs to the flat. Although it was not yet late, the sky was dark when I turned into Laundress Passage.It was November.
	
	 I don't suppose it's the destiny he had in mind for the masterwork that he spent two decades writing. Sometimes I wonder what he makes of his role as guardian of the bookshop keys. No one has wanted his fat gray book for thirty years. Poor Bailey.I closed the door and put the shop key in its usual place behind Bailey's Advanced Principles of Geometry.
	
	 That is when I thought, It is the hand of an invalid. But I knew no children. Each had been undertaken separately -- M A R G A R E T L E A -- as a new and daunting enterprise. There was no sense of flow in the letters that spelled out my name. Their uneven strokes either faded into nothing or were heavily etched into the paper. The letters seemed untrained. Although the style of the writing was old-fashioned, with its heavily embellished capitals and curly flourishes, my first impression was that it had been written by a child. The crisp-cornered envelope, puffed up with its thickly folded contents, was addressed in a hand that must have given the postman a certain amount of trouble. That was something of an event. For me.A letter.
	
	 Who was it who had had his mind's eye on me while I hadn't suspected a thing? Yesterday or the day before, while I had been going about my business, quietly and in private, some unknown person -- some stranger -- had gone to the trouble of marking my name onto this envelope.It gave me a queer feeling.
	
	) Reading can be dangerous. I can still feel the scar under my fringe now. Instead of being held buoyant by the water that so vividly surrounded me in my mind, I plummeted to the ground and knocked myself out. I have been like this ever since the age of seven when, sitting on a high wall and reading The Water Babies, I was so seduced by the descriptions of underwater life that I unconsciously relaxed my muscles. (I never read without making sure I am in a secure position.Still in my coat and hat, I sank onto the stair to read the letter.
	
	 You can read as clearly as if you were the very candlelight illuminating the page as the pen speeds over it. The intention of the writer, his thoughts, his hesitations, his longings and his meaning. Then you can read it. Until you wake into a dream where you are at once a pen flying over vellum and the vellum itself with the touch of ink tickling your surface. Think of nothing. You must relax. Breaks and releases in the flow. The pressure of the hand on the page. The speed of the pen. When you read a manuscript that has been damaged by water, fire, light or just the passing of the years, your eye needs to study not just the shape of the letters but other marks of production. That and the willingness to cultivate an inner eye. Patience and practice are all that is required. There is no great secret to it. Thanks to my work, I am experienced in the reading of difficult manuscripts.I opened the letter and pulled out a sheaf of half a dozen pages, all written in the same laborious script.
	
	 It began with a curt "Miss Lea"; thereafter the hieroglyphs resolved themselves quickly into characters, then words, then sentences.Not that this letter was anything like as challenging as some.
	
	This is what I read:
	
	 But boys do not leave their boyhood behind when they leave off their school uniform. It was the kind of thing a mother might buy for a boy leaving school for his first job, imagining that her child will somehow grow into it. The collar, the cut, the fabric, all wrong. The suit was brown and ugly and meant for a much older man. Awkward in his new suit. As tall as a man, but with the puppy fat of youth. A boy, really. Strange chap they sent me. I must look it out one of these days, for the biography.I once did an interview for the Banbury Herald.
	
	" The moment I set eyes on him, I thought, "Aha, what's he after? An intensity.There was something in his manner.
	
	 But provided they leave me alone, I won't hurt them. Naturally that annoys me. Just so long as they don't start on about storytelling and honesty, the way some of them do. Apart from the fact that they make dull companions.I've nothing against people who love truth.
	
	 The soothing, rocking safety of a lie. What you need are the plump comforts of a story. When fear and cold make a statue of you in your bed, don't expect hard-boned and fleshless truth to come running to your aid. No. When the lightning strikes shadows on the bedroom wall and the rain taps at the window with its long fingernails? What good is truth, at midnight, in the dark, when the wind is roaring like a bear in the chimney? What succor, what consolation is there in truth, compared to a story?My gripe is not with lovers of the truth but with truth herself.
	
	 My genius is not so frail a thing that it cowers from the dirty fingers of the newspapermen. For I have never believed that genius needs to be locked away out of sight to thrive. Hundreds over the course of a lifetime. So I give dozens of interviews a year. I mean, making things up, it's what we do for a living. Just because they always ask the same questions, it doesn't mean we have to give them the same old answers, does it? We writers are the real thing. Reporters are hacks. Well, what do they expect? "Same old questions," they complain. They get cross about it.Some writers don't like interviews of course.
	
	 A good story is always more dazzling than a broken piece of truth. It never failed. Their eyes would start to shine, and their grasp on the little chip of truth would loosen, until it dropped from their hand and fell, disregarded, by the wayside. A delicate operation. Inch them in the direction I wanted them to take, use my bait to draw them gently, imperceptibly, toward a prettier story than the one they had their eye on. I had to be careful. They would do research, come along with a little piece of truth concealed in their pocket, draw it out at an opportune moment and hope to startle me into revealing more.In the early years they used to try to catch me out.
	
	 Tell me about yourself. And you, Miss Winter, they said. They were like little children at bedtime. A dreamy, expectant look stole across their faces.) Then, the bit they were waiting for, the thing they had really come for. None. No. (Inside my head.) and the shorter my answers the better they liked it. How much of your main character is you? Are your characters based on real people? A quick run through the normal questions (Where do you get your inspiration? They knew roughly what to expect, would have been disappointed to leave without the story.Afterward, once I became famous, the Vida Winter interview became a sort of rite of passage for journalists.
	
	 Another brand-new biography. Then it's just a matter of neatening the edges, stitching in the ends, and it's done. Odds and ends that fell out in the editing. Offcuts from novels and stories, plots that never got finished, stillborn characters, picturesque locations I never found a use for. Hundreds more where they came from. Mere scraps from the bottom of my ragbag. Just a few strands, woven together in a pretty pattern, a memorable motif here, a couple of sequins there. Simple little stories really, not much to them.And I told.
	
	" "One day I met Vida Winter, and she told me a story. It would be something to tell their grandchildren.They went away happy, clutching their notebooks in their paws like children with sweets at the end of a birthday party.
	
	 I mean, whatever did he expect? Laughable. I've had people devise all kinds of stratagems to trick me into telling, and I can spot them a mile off, but that?" Now, what kind of appeal is that? He said, "Miss Winter, tell me the truth.Anyway, the boy from the Banbury Herald.
	
	 Tell me the truth, he said. Perhaps he was sickening for something. His forehead was damp with perspiration. He was after something quite specific, I was sure of it. Probing. Seeking. He watched me so closely. His eyes were glistening with an intent fever. What did he expect?A good question.
	
	 Tell me the truth. The ghastly excitement of it. The watery stirring of a previous life turning in my belly, creating a tide that rose in my veins and sent cool wavelets to lap at my temples. Like the past coming to life.I felt a strange sensation inside.
	
	 He disturbed me, this boy, with his pale face and his burning eyes. I turned it over in my mind, weighed up the likely consequences.I considered his request.
	
	"All right," I said.
	
	 A faint, absentminded good-bye and no backward glance.An hour later he was gone.
	
	 It's not easy for someone of my talent to produce a story like that. Or what people imagine real life to be, which is something rather different. The kind of story that looks like real life. No sparkle, no sequins, just a few dull and faded patches, roughly tacked together with the edges left frayed. An impoverished, malnourished little thing. I told him a story. How could I?I didn't tell him the truth.
	
	 He should have known better than to believe me. Not that I take all the blame. I had killed it. All that energy, the charge, the verve, gone. He shuffled away up the street, shoulders drooping, head bowed, each step a weary effort.I watched him from the window.
	
	I never saw him again.
	
	 So quiet that I as good as forgot about it." It sighed, it fidgeted, but eventually it fell quiet. "Not yet. In the end I did a deal. More than that, it was a danger. It was a distraction." But it wouldn't be still. "No. Over and over again. "No," I said. Tell me the truth. It rose and fell, with the memory of the boy's words.That feeling I had, the current in my stomach, my temples, my fingertips -- it remained with me for quite a while.
	
	 Time passes more quickly than you think. More, perhaps. Forty? Thirty years?What a long time ago that was.
	
	 We made a deal, remember? And then it turns to me, tightens its grip on my innards, gives a twist. The truth, it echoes, calling after the boy, watching his departing back. It won't take no for an answer. It refuses all negotiation, blocks discussion, insists on its rights. From being a meek and biddable thing, it has become a bully. The long dormancy has changed it. It sucks the air out of my lungs and gnaws the marrow from my bones. I can feel it, in my stomach, round and hard, about the size of a grapefruit. There is something growing inside me, dividing and multiplying. And lately I have felt again that strange inner stirring. Tell me the truth.The boy has been on my mind lately.
	
	It is time.
	
	 I will send a car to meet you from the half past four arrival at Harrogate Station.Come on Monday.
	
	Vida Winter
	
	 What had the letter done to me? When I at last woke up to myself, I could only guess what had been going on in the darkness of my unconsciousness. Inside you they work their magic. Wind themselves around your limbs like spider silk, and when you are so enthralled you cannot move, they pierce your skin, enter your blood, numb your thoughts. In expert hands, manipulated deftly, they take you prisoner. There is something about words. For I was spellbound. I don't know.How long did I sit on the stairs after reading the letter?
	
	 None. I knew only one statistic, and it was one that seemed relevant: How many books by Vida Winter had I, Margaret Lea, read? But I knew none of this then. This was the number of biographers who, for want of information, or lack of encouragement, or after inducements or threats from Miss Winter herself, had been persuaded to give up trying to discover the truth about her. The figure that might have interested me the most, as I sat there at the bottom of the stairs, was twenty-two. The difficulty comes less from working out how many books she has sold (an ever-changing figure in the millions) than in obtaining solid figures for the Bible -- whatever one thinks of the word of God, his sales data are notoriously unreliable. In terms of statistics, the most disputed question is this: Has she or has she not sold more books than the Bible? Fifty-six books published in fifty-six years; they are translated into forty-nine languages; Miss Winter has been named twenty-seven times the most borrowed author from English libraries; nineteen feature films have been based on her novels. I knew of course that she was popular, though the figures, when I later researched them, still came as a surprise. I was aware naturally of the various epithets that usually came attached to her name: England's best-loved writer; our century's Dickens; the world's most famous living author; and so on.I knew very little about Vida Winter.
	
	 Two items in particular had been selected out of the unheeded detritus that is my memory and placed for my attention. Returning to myself, I found that my thoughts had been rearranged in my absence.I shivered on the stairs, yawned and stretched.
	
	 In the background is the hiss of the gas heater; we hear the sound without hearing it for, side by side, together and miles apart, we are deep in our books. It is late autumn, it is raining and the windows have misted up. After lunch, when we have finished the unpacking and the cataloging and the shelving and we have no customers, we sit reading as usual. Our clients' faces, with the customary outward paleness and inner glow of the book lover, seem to light up when they spot the rich colors of the paperback covers. One to a priest, one to a cartographer, one to a military historian. Sold. But before the morning is out, three of the four books are gone. "I'll take them to the charity shop in my lunch hour," I say, and leave them on the side of the desk. At the shop we don't deal in contemporary fiction. A box of books we are unpacking from a private library clearance includes a number of Vida Winters.The first was a little scene involving my father.
	
	" I ask, surfacing."Shall I make tea?
	
	No answer.
	
	I make tea all the same and put a cup next to him on the desk.
	
	 He is oblivious to my every movement. I make a fresh pot and put another steaming cup beside him on the desk.An hour later the untouched tea is cold.
	
	 He is in another world, and I am a ghost. He cannot see me. He cannot hear me. I return the book to its original position and study my father's face. It is the fourth Vida Winter.Gently I tilt the volume in his hands so that I can see the cover.
	
	That was the first memory.
	
	 The skin that embellishes these remarkable bones has the opaque luminosity of alabaster; it appears paler still by contrast with the elaborate twists and coils of copper hair that are arranged with such precision about the fine temples and down the strong, elegant neck. Such bones, discovered by the archaeologists of the future, would seem an artifact, a product not of blunt-tooled nature but of the very peak of artistic endeavor. To contemplate the exquisite arc of the eye; the broad, smooth sweep of the cheekbones; the impeccable line and proportions of the nose, is to marvel that the randomness of human variation can produce something so supernaturally perfect as this. It is only an advertising photograph pasted on a billboard in a railway station, but to my mind's eye it has the impassive grandeur of long-forgotten queens and deities carved into rock faces by ancient civilizations. In three-quarter profile, carved massively out of light and shade, a face towers over the commuters who wait, stunted, beneath.The second is an image.
	
	 This woman, I remember thinking, as I gazed at her green, unseeing eyes, does not have a soul. But for me, looking into the large green eyes, I could not help being reminded of that commonplace expression about the eyes being the gateway to the soul. I can't say whether the other travelers that day felt the same way as I about the picture; they had read the books, so they may have had a different perspective on things. Intensified by some photographic sleight of hand to an inhuman green, the green of glass in a church window, or of emeralds or of boiled sweets, they gaze out over the heads of the commuters with perfect inexpression.As if this extravagant beauty were not enough, there are the eyes.
	
	 As famous for her secrets as for her stories, she was a perfect mystery. For although everyone knew Vida Winter -- knew her name, knew her face, knew her books -- at the same time nobody knew her. Though on reflection perhaps it was as much as anyone else might know. It was not much.Such was, on the night of the letter, the extent of my knowledge about Vida Winter.
	
	 This was curious enough in itself, but curiouser still was my next thought: Why should she want to tell it to me?Now, if the letter was to be believed, Vida Winter wanted to tell the truth about herself.
	
	
	